The first question I asked myself
and I'll ask you too is this:
What is poverty?
Maybe some of you imagine
that poverty has to do with this,
In fact, since I was a kid I believed --
or I should say I was told
that poverty was linked to this.
I am the fifth of six children:
Yomi, Mariela, Marcela,
Mauricio, me, and Oscar.
We were born in San Juan.
We came to Buenos Aires
for the moon and the stars.
My father had been promised
a job, a home, a car, success.
This is the only picture
I have of my parents together.
Because Buenos Aires killed my father.
He ended up dying
within a few years of being here.
And there it began an eternal struggle
to live with dignity
and to improve our quality of life.
We seized a plot with my brothers.
We were poor,
people who were living in an usurped land.
We sometimes even didn't have
anything to eat for dinner.
However, despite all this,
despite having lived
through discrimination,
and my whole family
being pointed out for many years,
there was something
I always loved and I always liked.
I love music, I'm a musician.
And I really discovered music
through a woman,
who, when I listened to her,
would always amaze me.
I would look at her and see her like...
an angel.
I knew all her songs, all her lyrics,
all her choreographies.
I learned all her songs,
I had all her tapes.
Back then we still had tapes.
And for me she was a star, an angel.
This woman was Gladys, la Bomba Tucumana.
(Laughter)
(Applause)
I dreamed with Gladys.
Once I told my mom,
"Mom, I want to be Gladys."
(Laughter)
And she said, "Oh son, don't you like
Antonio Ríos or Alcides?"
No, I wanted to be Gladys.
And my mom told me,
"Well, but how about La Nueva Luna?"
No, I dreamed of being
an artist like her one day.
I always dreamed of learning
to play her songs.
A great friend from childhood, Edgardo,
his mother, Olga worked
in the neighborhood developing projects
so that people like me, who lived
in these neighborhoods could study.
They had a project
in Crear Vale La Pena Foundation,
in which they worked with art
in the context of poverty.
My friend told me one day,
"Daniel, why don't you stop
pestering around with music
and sign up at the
community center for culture,
where they give free
keyboard and piano lessons."
I said, "No, me taking piano lessons?"
That would be ridiculous to go out there
and give a meaning to my life.
But he said to me, "You should go
sign up for the piano class."
And I signed up for piano lessons.
Saturdays at 9 am.
I said, "Oh, how nice!"
There was a teacher, a concert pianist,
at this organization --
Liliana Alpern --
who would give a few of hours
of free lessons per week
to people who could not afford
to pay for classes.
I started going to her piano class
when I was nine.
And I saw Lili, my piano teacher,
in high heels, with a silk shawl,
glasses, green eyes, blond hair.
And I looked at her and she looked at me.
She said, "What is your name?"
"Daniel." "What are you doing here?"
There was an upright piano beside her.
I said, "I want to play that."
And she says, "What do you want to play?"
(Laughter)
And I said, "Gladys, la Bomba Tucumana."
And she said, "Who is that woman?"
(Laughter)
"Wait, aren't you a music teacher?"
"Yes, I certainly am,
but I don't know all the musicians.
But if you bring a tape with her music,
I'll listen to it and I teach you."
"Really?" I asked. "Yes."
So I went back to my house, got the tape,
brought it back, and Lili went:
"B B B B B, C D, C D E, E F G, B C".
(Laughter)
And I said: "Wow!"
She began to teach me and I felt
I was John Lennon playing "Imagine."
(Laughter)
It was awesome.
(Applause)
Lili said, "Look Daniel, you can
learn this and much more if you want to."
"Really, Miss?"
"Yes. You can learn
everything you want to learn."
And the next Saturday I brought
La Nueva Luna, Los Charros, Gilda.
I learned to play a band
called Los Palmeras --
I would dream of them.
And she taught me all the music
I wanted to learn.
Pretty soon, I learned
everything I wanted.
And Lili said, "And now,
what do you want to learn?"
I said, "That's it, I've learned
to play what I wanted to learn."
"Daniel, these same chords were used
by a guy named Beethoven.
Do you know who Beethoven is?"
I told her, "Yes, a dog from a movie."
(Laughter)
"No, dear, Beethoven is not a dog.
Beethoven is a musician
who played Für Elise"
She played the song,
and I fell in love when I heard it.
I asked her: "Lili, can I play that?"
And Lili said, "You can play that
and much more, Daniel --
anything you want to play."
So there, at age of nine, I learned
to break the first level of poverty:
Cultural poverty.
I just thought that music was --
(Applause)
I thought music was
what I would hear in my neighborhood,
but didn't know that there were
other types of music that existed.
So I learned to be not only
a musician, but at age 14,
Lili gave me another challenge --
me and a fellow piano student,
Marcela Tula --
both of us attended her class.
"After five years of taking
free classes at the cultural center,
you two now should start teaching others."
And I said, "No, Lili. Me?
I can't teach others."
"Yes, you can."
"But Lili, I have nothing to give."
She said, "To give, you don't need
to have something in your pocket.
All you have to do
is to be willing to help others."
So I started teaching in my neighborhood.
Together with Marcela,
we both learned how to teach.
We gave classes to young people,
the very beginners in the neighborhood.
I went from being the kid,
who used to hang out
in the street looking for trouble,
to being the neighborhood teacher.
Passing by, people would call:
"Professor, Professor!"
So I'd pass by like four times.
I'd go to the grocer's and they would say,
"How are you, professor? Have a candy."
And I'd grab about five.
The grocer's daughter
was one of my students.
And there I learned to knock down
another level of poverty,
which is the poverty of dignity --
a type of poverty that often gets lost
because living in the context we lived in,
we tend to think that poverty
is only linked to hunger,
and feeling cold at night -- but no.
Poverty has little to do with economics.
It has to do with what you do
to design your life project.
What you do to say who you are,
regardless of the degree,
or the position you have in a company.
Who you are as a person.
That is what I learned at the age of 14,
to start teaching in my neighborhood.
When I was 17 --
(Applause)
At 17, I began to coordinate
the community cultural center
with activities for young people.
It wasn't just learning
and teaching anymore.
What we did was to help shape
this young group of people
to start thinking about our community,
the activities people in the neighborhood
can do to improve their quality of life,
not only of those who studied,
but our whole community.
We organized events in neighborhoods,
we celebrated Children's Day,
looking for the needs in our neighborhoods
and we began to improve
not only our lives,
but the lives of our neighbors.
I left the foundation when I was 25,
because I felt that it enabled me
to go from being a student
to becoming a teacher,
coordinator, executive director,
I even prepped young people
in political issues.
And I began to understand
that I had to knock down another poverty.
So I started working with a civil
organization called Inicia.
What we did at Inicia
was to work in a prison,
because the son of a friend of mine
was there in the unit
and we went to visit him.
When I went to the prison
the first thing I saw
were those drawings that you see
behind the young men,
it was like an art gallery.
They were drawings where they had drawn
everything they wanted.
I looked at Cristian with Olga
and we said, "Hey, Cristian,
what do you do here in this unit?"
"Nothing".
"What do you mean?"
"Nothing. Nothing on Monday,
nothing on Tuesday, nothing on Thursday."
"What if I proposed to do a workshop
where you can think about
the mistake you made, why you are here
and you can think of a project
for when you leave prison?"
And Cristian replied,
"Would you do that for me?"
"Of course."
Then we started a workshop
where we talked about leadership,
so they could lead their life project.
We had a book, "The New Leaders,"
which belonged to this organization.
And it had chapters like:
"Personal transformation,"
"The common good", "Ethics" or "Values."
We read each chapter with the inmates,
the 48 who attended the workshop.
And not only that, we created a comic book
and each of them put what they learned
from the chapters in the comic book.
That's when I knocked down
another poverty -- that of prejudice.
We think that people
who are deprived of their liberty
not only deserve to be there,
but they don't have the ability,
nor the dignity
to be able to change their future.
Well, they actually can
change their future.
All they need are opportunities.
And what I was providing there
was an opportunity.
But it's not only with this that I
knocked down the poverty of prejudice.
I got to work on another project
with a colleague, an acquaintance
from the gastronomic industry,
who had a restaurant chain
in down San Isidro.
He said, "Dani, in front of my restaurants
is the settlement Martin and Omar
and I don't know what to do,
because every time I pass by they ask me,
'Hey, mustache, got work for me?',
and I don't know what to do".
Then we created a program
called Cocina para Integrar.
What we did?
This man would teach the women
from the settlement to become chefs,
so that they are trained
not only to do any given job,
but also in a trade,
in the gastronomic industry.
And then I broke another type
of prejudice, another type of poverty.
The poverty of thinking
that people who are living
in a context of vulnerability
can only work doing odd jobs.
No, they are professionals
who also can be formed in trades,
as that of being a chef.
On this path I met with another person
who also helped me knock down
another one of my poverties.
We met during a talk we gave together.
He had a company which developed
products with design,
shoes with a different design.
He gave his talk, about a young company
that exported worldwide.
After I gave my talk he said to me,
"Dani, you have to work with me."
And I said, "Tomás, what do you want me
to work on in your business?"
"Do the same things in my company
that you did in the neighborhoods.
You'll be working in my neighborhood,
which is my business, my community,
with my employees."
"What do you want me to do?"
"I want you to be the HR manager."
And I said, "But, Tomás,
I don't even know how to clear salaries."
He says, "I don't care,
you will learn that,
what you know is to listen
and to be with the people."
After working three years with him,
he proposes me to be even more than that.
And today I'm the manager
of Culture and Happiness.
In the private sector I work as --
(Applause)
I not only work in the neighborhoods
to improve people's quality of life --
but also companies start
to think that all the people
working in a company can improve
their quality of life.
They have to work being happy
and as part of the company culture.
(Applause)
You may ask me today, what is your wealth?
My wealth has to do with this:
to have formed a family,
with my wife, with my brothers,
with my friends.
To be the parent of Lautaro and Catalina,
who is two months old.
And I want to tell you this:
any of you here
can be a Liliana Alpern.
Anyone of you can give their time
once a week to someone else,
so that they change their lives.
(Applause)
Regardless of your economic poverty
or your economic wealth,
don't make your life a poor life.
Thank you very much.
(Applause)